As experiment complexity in fields such as nuclear engineering continually
increases, so does the
demand for robust computational methods to simulate them.  In many
simulations, input design parameters and intrinsic experiment properties are
sources
of uncertainty.  Often small perturbations in uncertain parameters have
significant impact on the
experiment outcome.  For instance, in nuclear fuel performance, small changes
in fuel thermal conductivity can greatly affect maximum stress on the
surrounding cladding.
The difficulty quantifying input uncertainty impact in such systems has grown
with the
complexity of numerical models.  Traditionally, uncertainty quantification has
been approached using
random sampling methods like Monte Carlo.
For some models, the input parametric space and corresponding
response output space is sufficiently explored with few low-cost calculations.
For other models, it is computationally costly to obtain
good understanding of the output space.

To combat the expense of random sampling,
this research explores the possibilities of using advanced methods in
Stochastic Collocation for generalized Polynomial Chaos (SCgPC) as an
alternative to traditional uncertainty
quantification techniques such as Monte Carlo (MC) and Latin Hypercube
Sampling (LHS) methods for applications
in nuclear engineering.  We consider traditional SCgPC construction strategies
as well as
truncated polynomial spaces using Total Degree and Hyperbolic Cross
constructions.  We
also consider applying anisotropy (unequal treatment of different dimensions)
to the polynomial space,
and offer methods whereby optimal levels of
anisotropy can be approximated.  We contribute development to existing
adaptive polynomial construction
strategies.  Finally, we consider High-Dimensional Model Reduction (HDMR)
expansions, using SCgPC representations for
the subspace terms, and contribute new adaptive methods to construct them.
We apply these methods on a series of models of increasing complexity.  We use
analytic models of
various levels of complexity, then demonstrate performance on two
engineering-scale problems: a single-physics
nuclear reactor neutronics problem, and a multiphysics fuel cell problem
coupling fuels performance and
neutronics.  Lastly, we demonstrate sensitivity analysis for a time-dependent
fuels performance problem.
We demonstrate the application of all the
algorithms in RAVEN, a production-level uncertainty quantification framework.
